---
title: 'Did the Canadian wildfires have an effect on bird migration?'
date: 2023-09-18
permalink: /posts/2023/09/blog-post-1/
tags:
  - cool posts
  - birds
  - statistics
---
Did the Canadian wildfires have an effect on bird migration? 
======
I was running down Riverside Drive when I received a push notification on my phone: "**Emergenc--** Current health guidance suggests wearing properly fitted, high-quality masks (e.g., N95 or KN95) when outdoors to help reduce exposure and to limit outdoor activity as much as possible." 
On the 9th of June the smoke from the Canadian wildfires had spread around New York City in a thick blanket of barbecue-smelling orange tint, turning the Big Apple into a post-apocalyptical landscape. 
An avid birder and outdoor enthusiast, I had planned to bring a good friend of mine visiting me that week on a hike in Upstate New York: we were told that the air quality especially up North would be a problem. I had a thought that where the wildfires spread was likely where a lot of wildlife was migrating, especially in the summer nesting/breeding period. 



I went back home to France and didn't think much back on it. However recently I stumbled upon the following article: [Audubon: How do wildfires Canadas Boreal forest affect birds across continent](https://www.audubon.org/news/how-do-wildfires-canadas-boreal-forest-affect-birds-across-continent). This summer was recorded as the worst wildfires season recorded (since 1983). 
Fires are not inherently bad for wildlife. In fact, wildfires are part of a cycle for forest regeneration. I was told that when I was thirteen on a trip to the native forests of Australia by a friend of my parents while asking about fumes afar coming from a growing bushfire. I also remember about watching a BBC video clip on fire lilies blooming out of the ashes of wildfires in South Africa. In fact sporadic fires make the soil more fertile, and are beneficial to certain species. However these June wildfires were clearly the result of climate change, occurring in a scope and at times unpredicted. This is the case the article argues as well, nevertheless other than just claiming that this was unforeseen and unmatched events, there seems to be a lack of quantitative study on the effect of these wildfires on the bird population: scenarios at species level can be observed or supputated. 


But I still had lingering questions: what if the fires stroke during nesting season? What if they displaced species of birds?  What becomes of them? Will they succomb to predation more easily? Will they struggle to nourish their chicks? If the fires did select some species over others, could we distinguish them? How much of a danger is the smoke? As we are admonished to stay at home and limit our outings, what of the birds migrating through the thick smokes? 


Although I have no biology/ornithology training. I'll attempt to answer those questions myself, and using the only tools I have: a computer and heaps of data across the internet.

## Baseline
======
Naively, I'll start by answering the following questions. But as usual a question calls for another question in science. What do I want to evaluate? the effect of wildfire intensity on bird population counts. What data do I have on hands? How should I evaluate it?  What are the covariates? For starters, how do I set up the wildfire intensity? We can use the raw data from CIFFC which gives the total burnt surface. What temporal granularity are we considering the bird population counts? Years? Months? What spatial granularity? 

For baseline we'll consider the simplest of models, a linear model on the most aggregated level. We'll look into the effect of wildfires on migrating species abundance across years in the Canadian states where fires have occurred. 

## Bird population models
------
I had tried working with bird survey data earlier in the year for a class project. For this, I looked into one of the gold standard datasets available for bird enthusiasts: *the North American Breeding Bird Survey Dataset 1966-2021* containing avion point count data for more than 700 North American bird taxa collected during breeding season (around June). Many issues arise from observational count data of bird species: according to Ankori-Karlinsky et al., [North american breeding bird survey underestimates regional bird richness compared to breeding bird atlases](https: //doi.org/10.1002/ecs2.3925) where breeding bird atlases record presence-absence type data of species with different protocols as opposed to observed counts (wherein observer bias has a bigger influence). However, as we concern ourselves not with bird species richness but bird species relative abundance in the next part we will have to compromise with this data source. 

As the data for 2023 has yet to be released, we will have to wait until next year's release to evaluate our models and predictions. Instead we are going to explore the effect of wildfires on historical data. 




Bayesian prediction models 
------
The USGS released in 2011 (Link and Sauer) a R-package [bbsBayes](https://github.com/bbsBayes/bbsBayes) that uses hierarchical Bayesian models to assess status and trends of most of the recorded species of birds of the BBS using the temporal and spatial informations of the survey.  The package is maintained by Smith and Edwards who also released a [tutorial](https://bookdown.org/adam_smith2/bbsbayes_intro_workshop/) for its use.



Case study: 1995's wildfires
======
The Audubon article mentions that 2023 (at the time of the writing) was the 2nd worse fire ever recorded in the Canada boreal forests. Now after the wildfires season, we know that more than 17 million hectares were burnt down compared to the 1995 record standing at 7 millions. 





More references
=======
- This article investigates [megafires's effect on bird population](https://www.audubon.org/news/recent-megafires-imperil-even-fire-loving-forest-birds).
- This paper surveys the effect of [smoke on wildlife population](https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1748-9326/ac30f6). 
